# BOSHDeployment

- [BOSHDeployment](#boshdeployment)
  - [Description](#description)
  - [Reconcilers](#reconcilers)
    - [Deployment Reconciler](#deployment-reconciler)
    - [Generated Variable Reconciler](#generated-variable-reconciler)
    - [BPM Reconciler](#bpm-reconciler)

## Description

A BOSH deployment is created from a deployment manifest and optionally ops files.

The deployment manifest is based on a vanilla BOSH deployment manifest.
The ops files modify the deployment manifest. For example, ops files can be used to replace release tarballs with [docker images](https://ci.flintstone.cf.cloud.ibm.com/teams/containerization/pipelines/release-images), thus enabling deployment on Kubernetes.

A deployment is represented by the `boshdeployments.fissile.cloudfoundry.org` (`bdpl`) custom resource, defined in [`boshdeployment_crd.yaml`](https://github.com/cloudfoundry-incubator/cf-operator/tree/master/deploy/helm/cf-operator/templates/fissile_v1alpha1_boshdeployment_crd.yaml).
This [bdpl custom resource](https://github.com/cloudfoundry-incubator/cf-operator/tree/master/docs/examples/bosh-deployment/boshdeployment.yaml) contains references to config maps or secrets containing the actual manifests content.

After creating the bdpl resource on Kubernetes, i.e. via `kubectl apply`, the CF operator will start the reconciliation, which will [eventually result in the deployment](https://docs.google.com/drawings/d/126ExNqPxDg1LcB14pbtS5S-iJzLYPyXZ5Jr9vTfFqXA/edit?usp=sharing) of the BOSH release on Kubernetes.

## Reconcilers

The reconcilers add the `BOSHDeployment` resource as a owner to created resources, for [garbage collection](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/garbage-collection/#owners-and-dependents).
These are mostly extended job, extended statefulset and service resources.

Furthermore, the `BOSHDeployment` resource is also added as an owner to

* the ConfigMap/Secret containing the deployment manifest.
* referenced ConfigMaps/Secrets from the ops section.
* the generated variables extended secret

These ownerships are created, so the reconcilers can trigger on changes to the resources.
When the `BOSHDeployment` resource is deleted, the finalizer will remove the ownership to prevent garbage collection.

### Deployment Reconciler

Watches for:

- `BOSHDeployment`
- `ConfigMap`/`Secret` for ops files and the deployment manifest

Creates/updates:

- the "with-ops" secret
- the "Variable Interpolation" [auto-errand extended job](https://github.com/cloudfoundry-incubator/cf-operator/tree/master/docs/controllers/extendedjob.md#one-off-jobs-auto-errands)
- the "Data Gathering" auto-errand extended job

> **Note:** the output of the ["Variable Interpolation"](https://github.com/cloudfoundry-incubator/cf-operator/tree/master/docs/commands/cf-operator_util_variable-interpolation.md) `ExtendedJob` is the input for the "Data Gathering" `ExtendedJob`:
>
> - Interpolated manifest
>
> The ["Data Gathering"](https://github.com/cloudfoundry-incubator/cf-operator/tree/master/docs/commands/cf-operator_util_data-gather.md) step generates 2 secrets for each Instance Group:
>
> - Instance Group Resolved Properties
> - Instance Group BPM
>
> The "Versioned" `Secret` for Instance Group Resolved Properties is referenced by the Instance Group `ExtendedStatefulSets` and `ExtendedJobs`

Handles deletion:

- remove all ownership from configurations(ConfigMaps, Secrets)

### Generated Variable Reconciler

Watches for:

- the "with-ops secret" (e.g. `nats-deployment.with-ops`)

Creates/updates:

- `ExtendedSecret` for each explicit variable from the manifest

> **Note:** the `Secrets` generated by these `ExtendedSecrets` are referenced by the "Variable Interpolation" `ExtendedJob`.
> When these get created/updated, the "Variable Interpolation" job is run.

### BPM Reconciler

Watches for:

- the "Versioned" `Secret` for Instance Group BPM

Creates/updates:

- actual BOSH Instance Group `ExtendedStatefulSets` and `ExtendedJobs`
